<div id='meta-data'>
    <div key='subtext' value='extending core types in Rust'></div>
    <div key='dob' value='12/20/2024'></div>
</div>

## Sandbox
The sandbox for this article can be found [here](https://github.com/Phillip-England/sandbox-rust-blanket-implementations).

My conversation with ChatGPT regarding the topics can be found [here](https://chatgpt.com/share/6766d509-bdb8-8005-a6eb-28fd226dd9e2).


## Discovery
I wanted to get started working on a simple string parsing library in Rust to get my feet wet, and to build a low-level primitive tool I can bring with me into future projects.

I basically want something that will allow me to do quick string operations I find myself performing frequently.

[Here](https://github.com/phillip-england/purse) is a tiny Go implementation of the sort of thing I am discussing.

Just some quick and dirty functions.

## Rust is Different
Upon researching how to lay out the library and the best methods to ensure my users can work with both `String` and `&str`, I came across the idea of [blanket implementations](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/what-are-blanket-implementations/49904).

In Go, it made sense to use functions because Go only has one string type. But since Rust has multiple string types, we need to think about how to incorporate multiple types in our library.

I thought to myself, "Can I just create a trait and apply it to both `String` and `&str`?"

The answer is, yes, using blanket implementations.

## Compare to Javascript
I think looking at how Javascript and Rust handle this idea is important as the Javascript example is a bit more easy to digest, but it has the same underlying idea.

In Javascript, let's imagine we want to take some object and extend it. Well, we could do something like this in the browser:

```js
window.hello = () => {
    console.log('hello from the window');
}
```

Then, later on in our program, we may call the method like:
```js
window.hello();
// hello from the window
```

Javascript is prototype-based and allows you to directly mutate core objects in the language.

Rust does not provide us the ability to do this. So, in Rust, instead of directly altering core types, we can *extend* them using traits.

## Traits as Extensions
Traits can be implemented on types in a unique variety of ways.

NOTE TO SELF: Here I am again, discussing traits in Rust. Of all the features I've come across, traits seem to be one of the most fundamental building blocks of Rust.

Let's first start by defining a trait we wish to implement on `&str` and `String`:

```rs
pub trait SomeExtension {
    fn shout(&self) -> String;
}
```

## The AsRef Trait
Rust has a trait named, `AsRef` which can be used to implement other traits on multiple core types at once.

Before we dive into how to use `AsRef` to implement `SomeExtension` on both `&str` and `String`, we should take a closer look at how `AsRef` actually works.

You can find the [docs](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/convert/trait.AsRef.html) for `AsRef` here along with a [page](https://web.mit.edu/rust-lang_v1.25/arch/amd64_ubuntu1404/share/doc/rust/html/book/first-edition/borrow-and-asref.html) that works through the `AsRef<T>` trait versus the `Borrow` trait.

One of the first things I've noticed is how the Rust standard library has a whole module called `convert` which might be useful to take a deeper dive into later. It might be a good idea to just study the standard library and see how the core Rust team codes their own data types.

NOTE TO SELF: Did you take the time to study the Rust standard library?

## Implementing Our Extension
Now that we know `AsRef` can be used to implement traits on multiple types in a generic way, we can use it to implement `SomeExtension` on both `&str` and `String` types.

To implement `SomeExtension`, write:
```rs
impl<T> SomeExtension for T
where
    T: AsRef<str>,
{
    fn shout(&self) -> String {
        let s = self.as_ref();
        format!("{}!", s.to_uppercase())
    }
}
```

Then, we can use our extension like so:
```rs
fn main() {
    let some_str = "i am going to shout";
    let shout = some_str.shout();
    let some_string = String::from("i also shout");
    let shout2 = some_string.shout();
    println!("{} - {}", shout, shout2);
}
```

As you can see, `&str` and `String` can now use the `shout` method from the `MyExtension` trait.

## Conclusion
Again, I am finding myself in a place where I feel the need to really dive deep into traits in Rust. They keep coming up and their generic syntax is one of the most challenging things about reading the language and getting a good mental model of it.

I am thinking I skim through [The Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/) over the next few days and just get some more general exposure to Rust concepts and to get better at looking at the code.
